Welcome to Data Journalism in R
================

``` r
print("Hello world")
```

    #>  [1] "Hello world"

Now that we got that out of the way, welcome to a brand new Storybench
vertical, Data Journalism in `R`\! This space will be home to tutorials,
links to interesting projects that use `R`, and all varieties of other
data journalism and `R`-related miscellany.

As I’ll be your tour guide, I figure I should tell you a bit about
myself. I’m a PhD Candidate in the English department here at
Northeastern as well as a freelance journalist. I began learning `R`
several years ago in the context of a Humanities Data Analysis course
that I took with History professor Ben Schmidt. Since then, I’ve put my
`R` wizardry skills to work on the [Viral Texts
Project](http://www.viraltexts.org/), as well as on a number of other
projects. You can check out some
[links](http://jonathandfitzgerald.com/digital/) on my website if you’re
interested. You can also [follow me on
Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/jon_fitzgerald).

Of course, there are a number of tools and programming languages
available for journalists who want to work with data, so it might be
worth saying something about why we’re featuring `R` here. Let’s start
with the question of pre-made tools versus learning to do some
programming. While web-based tools have become increasinlgy
sophisticated in recent years (you can check out a list that the NULab
compiled [here](https://web.northeastern.edu/nulab/resources/)), I’ve
found that with even a little bit of coding skills, you can go a lot
further. This is the know-enough-to-be-dangerous model. And actually,
I’ve found in the years I’ve been learning `R`, that is actually
pretty fun–in a sometimes frustrating stay up way past midnight trying
to solve this one litte problem kind of way.

Anyway, that’s probably enough by way of introduction. Storybench has
already published several posts related to working with `R`, and you can
see some of those here. My first, non-introduction post is also live now
and focuses on connecting RStudio to Twitter and scraping down some
data. [Check it out](http://www.storybench.org/twitter-r)\!
