Setting up access to the YouTube API
====================================

It’s even easier to access YouTube’s metadata (views, likes, dislikes,
comments, etc.) thanks to the
[`tuber`](https://soodoku.github.io/tuber/articles/tuber-ex.html)
package by [Gaurav Sood](https://www.gsood.com/).

Make sure you `install` the package and load it with `library()`

    install.packages("tuber")
    library(tuber) # youtube API
    library(magrittr) # Pipes %>%, %T>% and equals(), extract().
    library(tidyverse) # all tidyverse packages
    library(hrbrthemes) # themes for graphs

Sood wrote an excellent, easy-to-use package for accessing the YouTube
data API. If you’re like me, you love screenshots for setting up new
tools like this. Below is a quick outline for the steps to get your
application id and password set up in R.

1) Enable the APIs
------------------

First head over to your [Google APIs
dashboard](https://console.developers.google.com/apis/dashboard) (you’ll
need an account for this). Click on “ENABLE APIS AND SERVICES”.

<img src="figs/32-00-google-api.png" width="1976" />

This will bring up a laundry list of APIs, but we only need the four
pertaining to YouTube (see below) and the Freebase API.

Click on the search bar and type in YouTube and you should see four
options. Enable all of them.

<img src="figs/32-01-youtube-api.png" width="2270" />

**IMPORTANT** you’ll also have to search for and enable the Freebase
API.

2) Create your credentials
--------------------------

After these have been enabled, you’ll need to create credentials for the
API. Click on the Credentials label on the left side of your Google
dashboard (there should be a little key icon next to it).

<img src="figs/32-02-google-api-credentials.png" width="2182" />

After clicking on the Credentials icon, you’ll need to select the OAuth
client ID option.

<img src="figs/32-03-create-credentials.png" width="826" />

### Create your OAuth

This next step is where we’ll name OAuth client ID and select the option
for “Other” application type.

<img src="figs/32-04-create-youtube-api-r.png" width="1248" />

We’re told we’re limited to 100 sensitive scope logins until the OAuth
consent screen is published. That’s not a problem for us, so we’ll go
ahead and copy both the client ID and client secret.

<img src="figs/32-05-oauth-cred-google.png" width="988" />

After clicking on the copy icons, we will save both into two objects in
RStudio (`client_id` and `client_secret`).

    client_id <- "20939048240-snjuunf5kp1n788b4gvi84khk553u36f.apps.googleusercontent.com"
    client_secret <- "O9eT8Q_ldnivnvopqkvJd32Hv"

3) Authenticate the application
-------------------------------

Now we can run `tuber`’s `yt_oauth()` function to authenticate the
application. We’ve included the token as a blank string (`token = ''`)
because the function kept looking for the `.httr-oauth` file in our
local directory (but we didn’t create one).

    # use the youtube oauth 
    tuber::yt_oauth(app_id = client_id,
             app_secret = client_secret,
             token = '')

Provided we did everything correct, `tuber::yt_oauth()` *should* prompt
the following message in the R console:

    Use a local file ('.httr-oauth'), to cache OAuth access credentials between R sessions?

    1: Yes
    2: No

Select `2` and your internet browser should open up and ask you to sign
into the Google account you set everything up with (see the images
below). You’ll see the name of your application in place of “*Your
application name*”.

<img src="figs/32-06-sign-in-with-youtube.png" width="1088" />

After signing in, you’ll be asked if the YouTube application you created
can access your Google account. If you approve, click “Allow”.

<img src="figs/32-07-google-credentials-allow.png" width="910" />

After clicking “Allow”, the browser should give you a blank page with a
cryptic,
`Authentication complete. Please close this page and return to R.`
message.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Accessing YouTube data
======================

Great! Now that we’re all set up, we will download some data into
RStudio. Be sure to check out the [reference
page](https://soodoku.github.io/tuber/reference/index.html) and the
[YouTube API reference
docs](https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3/docs/) on how to access
various meta data from YouTube videos.

We’ll download some example data from [Dave Chappelle’s comedy central
playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLG6HoeSC3raE-EB8r_vVDOs-59kg3Spvd),
which is a collection of 200 of his most popular skits.

Downloading the playlist data
-----------------------------

We will be using the playlist id from the url to access the content from
the videos. Here is some information on the playlistId parameter:

> The `playlistId` parameter specifies the unique ID of the playlist for
> which you want to retrieve playlist items. Note that even though this
> is an optional parameter, every request to retrieve playlist items
> must specify a value for either the `id` parameter or the `playlistId`
> parameter.

Dave Chappelle’s playlist is in the url below. We pass it to the
`stringr::str_split()` function to get the `playlistId` out of it.

    dave_chappelle_playlist_id <- stringr::str_split(
        string = "https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLG6HoeSC3raE-EB8r_vVDOs-59kg3Spvd", 
        pattern = "=", 
        n = 2,
        simplify = TRUE)[ , 2]
    dave_chappelle_playlist_id

    [1] "PLG6HoeSC3raE-EB8r_vVDOs-59kg3Spvd"

Ok–we have created a vector for Dave Chappelle’s playlistId from the
url, now we can use the `tuber::get_playlist_items()` to collect the
videos into a `data.frame`.

    DaveChappelleRaw <- tuber::get_playlist_items(filter = c(playlist_id = "PLG6HoeSC3raE-EB8r_vVDOs-59kg3Spvd"), 
                                                  part = "contentDetails",
                                                  # set this to the number of videos
                                                  max_results = 200) 

We should check these data to see if there is one row per video from the
playlist (recall that Dave Chappelle had 200 videos).

    # check the data for Dave Chappelle
    DaveChappelleRaw %>% dplyr::glimpse(78)

    Observations: 200
    Variables: 6
    $ .id                             <chr> "items1", "items2", "items3", "item…
    $ kind                            <fct> youtube#playlistItem, youtube#playl…
    $ etag                            <fct> "p4VTdlkQv3HQeTEaXgvLePAydmU/G-gTM9…
    $ id                              <fct> UExHNkhvZVNDM3JhRS1FQjhyX3ZWRE9zLTU…
    $ contentDetails.videoId          <fct> oO3wTulizvg, ZX5MHNvjw7o, MvZ-clcMC…
    $ contentDetails.videoPublishedAt <fct> 2019-04-28T16:00:07.000Z, 2017-12-3…

Collecting statistics from a YouTube playlist
---------------------------------------------

Now that we have all of the video `ids` (not `.id`), we can create a
function that extracts the statistics for each video on the playlist.
We’ll start by putting the video ids in a vector and call it
`dave_chap_ids`.

    dave_chap_ids <- base::as.vector(DaveChappelleRaw$contentDetails.videoId)
    dplyr::glimpse(dave_chap_ids)

    chr [1:200] "oO3wTulizvg" "ZX5MHNvjw7o" "MvZ-clcMCec" "4trBQseIkkc" ...

`tuber` has a `get_stats()` function we will use with the vector we just
created for the show ids.

    # Function to scrape stats for all vids
    get_all_stats <- function(id) {
      tuber::get_stats(video_id = id)
    } 

Now we introduce a bit of iteration from [the `purrr`
package](https://purrr.tidyverse.org/). The `purrr` package provides
tools for ‘functional programming’, but that is a much bigger topic for
a later post.

For now, just know that the `purrr::map_df()` function takes an object
as .`x`, and whatever function is listed in `.f` gets applied over the
`.x` object. Check out the code below:

    # Get stats and convert results to data frame 
    DaveChappelleAllStatsRaw <- purrr::map_df(.x = dave_chap_ids, 
                                              .f = get_all_stats)

    DaveChappelleAllStatsRaw %>% dplyr::glimpse(78)

    Observations: 200
    Variables: 6
    $ id            <chr> "oO3wTulizvg", "ZX5MHNvjw7o", "MvZ-clcMCec", "4trBQse…
    $ viewCount     <chr> "4446789", "19266680", "6233018", "8867404", "7860341…
    $ likeCount     <chr> "48699", "150691", "65272", "92259", "56584", "144625…
    $ dislikeCount  <chr> "1396", "6878", "1530", "2189", "1405", "3172", "1779…
    $ favoriteCount <chr> "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0", "0"…
    $ commentCount  <chr> "2098", "8345", "5130", "5337", "2878", "9071", "4613…

Fantastic! We have the `DaveChappelleRaw` and `DaveChappelleAllStatsRaw`
in two `data.frame`s we can export (and timestamp!)

    # export DaveChappelleRaw
    readr::write_csv(x = as.data.frame(DaveChappelleRaw), 
                     path = paste0("data/", 
                                   base::noquote(lubridate::today()),
                                   "-DaveChappelleRaw.csv"))
    # export DaveChappelleRaw
    readr::write_csv(x = as.data.frame(DaveChappelleAllStatsRaw), 
                     path = paste0("data/", 
                                   base::noquote(lubridate::today()),
                                   "-DaveChappelleAllStatsRaw.csv"))
    # verify
    fs::dir_ls("data", regexp = "Dave")

Be sure to go through the following `purrr` tutorials if you want to
learn more about functional programming:

-   [R for Data Science by H. Wickham & G.
    Grolemund](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/iteration.html#the-map-functions)

-   [purrr Tutorial by J.
    Bryan](https://jennybc.github.io/purrr-tutorial/)

-   [A purrr tutorial - useR! 2017 by C.
    Wickham](https://github.com/cwickham/purrr-tutorial)

-   [Happy dev with {purrr} - by C.
    Fay](https://colinfay.me/happy-dev-purrr/)

Also check out the [previous post on using
APIs](http://www.storybench.org/how-to-access-apis-in-r/).
